Start another round, uh, Dr. Russell.
So, um, first of all, I would just like
to thank Inland revenue for page 16 of the report
where you have restored the information.
It wasn't there last year, but the rest about where we have,
where we've spent money, because I did miss that last year
and I really appreciate having it back this year.
And I will social media it later. Thank
You. And, and in
retrospect, I think it's a good idea
that we do share what the money is used for. So thank
You for the prompt. That's
the easiest place to find our government account.
Um, investment boost or the immediate, um, we,
we do have a real set of concerns around that.
Um, so it started, what was the budget date this year?
That was the date that 22nd of that.
Um, I don't know
how many people have claimed that accelerated.
So that immediate write off yet? Not yet, no.
Do you have systems in place for tracking it?
Uh, so, um, we, we have put,
we're in the process of putting a, uh,
a data point in the IR 10 return Right.
For next, for the, you know, the next return. So, um, sorry
For the tax year ending 31 March, 2020.
Yeah. Yep, yep.
So, um, that will record if people
have claimed the investment boost.
Yeah. So we'll know how much has been claimed. Yep.
Um, the way our tax returns work though is,
is we won't receive that until
July, 2027 because, because people had so long to file.
Yep. So, but yeah, we, we, we are in the process of
Flexing that, but eventually we will get some data on
how many people have Yep.
How many entities have claimed it,
and how much they've claimed.
Yep. Great. Okay.
Um, so we're just have to wait for that information.
Um, but in the development of, uh, sorry, that policy, um,
one of the things we were concerned about was the commercial
buildings and the fact that people had already started on
commercial buildings then get a bonus.
Yeah. Uh, what sort of policy work did you do around that?
So it's a, it's a, it's a really good question.
So if you think about the concept for investment boost, um,
it was designed to apply to new marginal investment,
not, not investment.
That's, that's already there. Yeah.
So with a building, obviously it's got a long lead time.
So we did have commercial buildings that were in the process
of being built that spanned the budget.
So we had a choice.
We could either go do the Australian approach,
which is essentially provide the investment boost from
when, when the contracts were entered into, essentially.
Yeah. So in other words, those wouldn't qualify
because the contracts were entered into
before the application date.
Yeah. Or the other approach,
and this is the one we took, um, was to
allow investment boost for assets
where they become available for use
after the application date.
And the reason for that is
because we've got to get these rules,
the investment boost rules to merge well
with the depreciation rules.
Yep. And depreciation turns on on availability for use. Yep.
So that's why we, but, but we do accept that you,
you'd end up providing investment booths to buildings
that had already been started.
So that's the, that's the explanation. Yeah. So
The alternative in terms of, I mean
that I, I get that that's Yeah.
Makes sense. But the alternative would've been
to exclude commercial buildings. Um, you
Know, you, you could exclude commercial buildings.
Um, our, our, our strong advice to the government was
if, if you look at the effective marginal tax rates on
different forms of investment, the ones that are the highest
are ones which involve commercial buildings.
So, and that's because we don't allow depreciation on them.
So what we were saying was, well,
our advice was actually reinstate
depreciation on commercial buildings
and provide investment boost.
Right. But they, the, the decision was made to, to,
to do investment boost.
So that, that was our advice.
They, that it just, so, um, and, and that's
because of the effective margin tax rates on
commercial buildings.
Try trying to, try
and trying to remain neutral as to encouraging what's,
you know, what sort of investment basically.
So a commercial building gets the 20% immediate write off,
but no further depreciation.
That's right. Okay. Alright.
Well, we're just have to wait
and see on the information on that.
Um, I, I, um, Dr. Ross, I should also say
we are doing a survey as well.
So, um, in December, I think we're putting out a survey,
which is which,
because we realize the tax returns is gonna take so long.
Yeah. Which will ask people, um, businesses, um,
you know, have you responded
to this investment boost, and if so, how?
Right. Oh, if so,
How So, so, so in other words, has this investment boost,
um, what we're trying to get at there is have you
invested in things that you
otherwise wouldn't have invested into?
So, ha has, has your behavior changed
because of investment boost, which
That's gonna be hard to get in a survey. So,
Which the only way really is to get I know, I
Know. Yeah. Are you gonna get
people to respond as swap
classes of assets they bought? Or just that broad
Question? Yeah, so, so
we haven't completely finished designing it
yet, but it's, um, it will ask classes of assets
and is there something that you,
you wouldn't have bought if it wasn't for investment boost?
So it's quite right. So,
and itself, it'll be people reporting their own behaviors,
But yeah, it's not, I mean, it's not perfect, but it'll
Give us a broad brush. Okay. Thank
you. Yep. Okay. Supplementary
Dr. Woods.
What, uh, we had a, a conversation
with treasury this morning about this as well in terms
of the advice that went in to developing the,
this, the, the policy.
And so 1% growth in GDP over 20 year period,
it's quite a gradual increase in GDP.
Um, but one of the things
that we're really interested in knowing is around the,
the inputs into the methodology to get to the,
the one per the 1% over 20 year figure, um,
is this dependent on particular, uh, ratios of classes
of a assets, for example.
So, uh, plant, um, versus Utes.
Um, so in terms of, so any information that we can get
around where you think if we're gonna maximize the GDP
growth, we need to see the highest levels of investment.
So what, just to explain
how we did the methodology just in the high level.
So what we did is, the first thing we did is,
is we looked at all the different classes of assets.
So, um, we looked at, um,
The four big categories, buildings, construction, plum,
machinery and transport.
Which, which is essentially the, uh,
and what we did is we, we, we used a model that we used
for our long-term insights briefing a few years ago
and measured the current effective
tax rates on all of those things.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and we found that they were
on some of 'em, they were quite high.
And then what we did is we took,
we modeled the investment boost
and we said, how much would investment boost lower those
effective tax rates across all those asset categories?
And then what we did is we took that input
and we put it into, um, a model that a US
that we got from a US academic called Jane Gravel.
And that modeled, that was an,
that was the input into that model.
And we obviously made a whole bunch
of other assumptions in that model.
And that was the model that generated the
increase over 20 years for GDP of 1%
and wages of one point half percent.
And it also modeled that you'll get half of
that increase in the first five years I think.
So that, that was our methodology. Um, and we, we, yeah.
So anyway, that's, that's just
That, just just on that so that, so,
so half a percent growth in GDP in the first five
years, and that's, that's what
The money Five in wages.
Yeah. And we're not going to really have much
of a sense of how that's performing until 2027
in terms of those
Other than the survey results, than the survey,
which might give us in an early indication. Yeah.
So in terms of the, the tracking of the performance of,
of, of that modeling,
it's gonna be very difficult to do, isn't it?
Yeah. It's just the nature of the tax system though, that
that drives that outcome rather than
Totally, yeah.
Um, did you provide any advice, um,
or alternative models with caps,
sun sunset clauses targeting?
I mean, this is, as I understand it,
an open-ended appropriation, um,
that you could have some very big projects, um, that come in
and, and file for some very large, um, amounts.
Um, and in fact, ministers themselves were having to check
with colleagues sitting in the chair when it was on the
floor of the house, whether
or not, I mean, minister Jones was checking whether
or not a new oil and gas field, for example, would qualify.
Um, did you provide any, yeah, so any advice around that?
So we, our, our strong advice to,
because the, the policy
rationale was an inc an increasing
capital stock across the board.
So the, the, the,
the logic go goes something along the lines of New Zealand
as capital shallow, we want a policy lever that will
increase capital stock across the board, what we said
as inland revenue and and treasury.
Um, we don't think it's, we think the market is best placed
to work out where those, where
that capital stock should increase, should occur.
So our, our strong advice was to, was to apply the, um,
investment boosts to all assets,
including commercial buildings except
for intellectual property,
because it's that, um, that,
that guess gives you some integrity concerns.
Um, and that was broadly accepted.
A cap was discussed.
Our gain, our strong advice was do not have a cap.
What we're interested in here is
an increase in capital stock.
We want big investment and small investment.
We shouldn't be discriminating against big investment.
So, um, that was, that was our, um, that was our advice,
and it was, it was accepted.
So that's, yeah. Importantly, it's based on the objectives
That were set by.
Yeah. Okay. Dan
Butler. Thanks. Were
there any modeling around different, um, rates?
You know, we, we landed on the 20%.
Were they modeling, you know, 40% percent
as a Yeah. Can you tell us?
Yeah, I, I, I, I'm sure we can come back to you on exactly
what we did provide different scenarios.
There was like a, I'm pretty sure there was like a, a 10,
a 20, 40, maybe even gone up to 50.
Um, so we did, we provide all those models
and the general
conclusion was 20% was a bit of a sweet spot.
Um, but I think the model does tell you that you can go up
to 40% and,
and while the gains do diminish a bit,
you still get net gains.
Yeah. And then it just becomes can you afford to, yeah.
Yeah. After 40, you start
to subsidize the tax system starts to subsidize investments.
That would never have happened
if it wasn't for the tax system.
Yeah, understood.
So, but I can give you a bit more on, oh,
I think, is that about, is that enough?
Yeah, that's enough. Yeah. Thank you. Okay.
Um, primary from Chloe
Sw, uh, are you guys familiar with tech, just tax justice,
ros, uh, big tech little tax report?
I am. Um, no. Cool.
Um, so I guess just then to step through a bit of it, um,
when the government made the decision not
to pursue the digital services tax,
did you guys end up providing any advice about alternatives
that could possibly be pursued?
Or was that, that,
So on the digital services tax, um, we,
our, our advice on that has always been
a multilateral option is better than a unilateral option.
Mm-hmm. Because unilateral options are, are messy.
Every country has a different one.
Um, but so we've always provided that advice.
Um, when the government decided to not continue
with the digital service and take it off the order paper,
we didn't provide any additional advice on whether
there should be an alternative to that. Mm-hmm.
Does it concern the IRD that these massive multi, multi,
multi-billion dollar corporations,
multinational corporations, are currently making billions
of dollars in this country and paying very little in tax?
Well, that's, it's, um, I
Mean, that's why we're in favor
of the multilateral approach.
Mm-hmm. Um, you know, we continue to be engaged at the OECD.
Mm-hmm. Uh, in the hope of, um, bringing a resolution
that is, that is multilateral in nature
and provides, you know, an appropriate set
of outcomes for New Zealand.
Okay. Um, to that effect, have you been providing,
so I'm hearing that you've got a work stream
or are engaged in work at the OECD level? Yeah.
Yeah, that's, that's Right. Yeah.
And has there been any further information commissioned
or advice commissioned
by ministers on something along the lines of dealing
with this tax treatment of these
No, the, the moment we're very much, you know,
there's still, there, there are conversations going
on at the LECD.
So we're, we're, um, currently that's the primary focus.
Mm. Um, and no, nothing,
So, I mean, what's, what's happening the OC on?
So you might've heard about the pillar one and pillar two.
Yeah. So pillar one is the, is the multilateral solution
that would be instead of a digital services tax mm-hmm.
Um, that has, that really, I mean,
while work is still happening,
it has essentially stall mm-hmm.
Um, the, there's a lot
of action happening on the pillar two one, which is
basically around ensuring
or trying to ensure that countries have incentives
to have at least a 15% company tax tax rate.
Mm-hmm. And that is, um, that is, you know, we,
there, there are discussions going on there,
but that's probably where
more of the action is at the moment. Mm-hmm.
Um, one of the proposals
or ideas in that tax report is applying legislation
that we already have in the form
of the 5% withholding tax rates stipulated,
obviously in the New Zealand US double taxation agreement
to service licensing fees for the big four being Google, uh,
Facebook, Amazon, and Microsoft.
And they estimate that this could yield
around $130 million per annum.
Does that track at all with any work that you've done?
Um, I mean, I, I, I understand the proposal.
Um, I, I just, I just need to take a look at it.
Um, yeah. But, um,
I, I, I don't think we've actively looked at that.
I mean, I think the, the, essentially the DST was mm-hmm.
Was the alternate to
what was happening at the a CD, the pillar one.
So yeah, I don't think we've, we've taken,
we haven't had any further work Mm. On alternatives to
That. I guess part of what
I'm getting at here is that, you know,
with enforcement, uh,
and the other work that even taken in the past year
or two, uh, you've been looking at
how you apply already existing stuff
to get a greater tax take from those who should be paying,
uh, if we are to fairly
and justly apply the laws that we already have as
to whether those are fair and just
as a matter of judgment, et cetera.
But to that effect, I mean,
why have you not been looking at this?
And when it comes
to these massive multinational tech corporations?
So essentially at the moment with an existing legislation,
they're paying what they're required to pay.
I think what the OECD work does, what the DST would do is
to change the nature of the legislation.
So, uh, so it is not like they're not actually,
there's no suggestion that they are breaking the law
or breaking the tax law.
Um, and the focus on what the appropriate taxation for
that group should be has been a, the preference
for the multilateral approach.
And then secondly, the DST,
I guess if I can just unpack
that a little bit more and I, I totally hear you.
I mean, I recall being in a debate in the parliamentary
chamber six or seven or so years ago,
and the honorable Andrew Bailey was saying to me
that there is such a thing as legitimate tax avoidance,
which I think really goes to the heart
of saying the quiet part out loud.
Uh, but what I'm getting at here is that one
of the proposals is just to apply
existing legislation when it comes
to the withholding tax rate
to these multinational corporations.
Can you foresee any barriers to doing so?
I think we need to take a look at the
report to being honest.
Is there any way in which I can ask you
to do so and come back to us? Is that,
That you probably need to do that via the minister,
'cause it would need to be part of their work
program to progress it.
Thank You. By,
I think you've basically answered it,
but just for the record, um, IR is not aware of any,
uh, multinational digital services company
that's not meeting its tax obligations in
Zealand. That's correct.
Yep. Thank you. Okay.
But we can adequately enforce the law better.
No, that's not what they're saying.
Uh, no, what they're saying is
that there's potential ambiguity in terms of
Didn't say that either. Okay.
Chloe, have you got any more questions?
You said that, uh, on this primary, um,
no, I mean, I guess it's, yeah, just primarily about those
Function. Okay. We'll go back
To, thank you, uh, Dr. Russell.
So now that we've mentioned the work program, I have your,
your work program, um, and looks good.
There's just a couple of, um, uh, issues I'd like
to follow up with.
Um, uh,
the first one is the simplifying fringe benefit tax.
What, if anything, is continuing to happen in that space?
So we, it's on the work program.
Um, so we are, we've had some really good
meetings with and engagements with, with stakeholders
and we, we've developed a, a, a refined proposal
that is currently with ministers
for, for, for consideration. Right.
Okay. Yeah. Well let go out to a discussion doc again for
Well, we, we did the discussion document.
Yeah, I know we did the proposal.
Um, it's, it won't,
there won't be another discussion document if you Right.
Okay. But we have engaged really constructively
with the, with various stakeholders
and Yeah, I think we, we've got, we've got a good solution.
It's just whether, um,
That's wrong. Yeah.
Okay.
Um, look, the other one, um, sitting in here, most
of the rest i, I kind of know enough about is the, um, stuff
around charities and Yeah.
Not for profits. Yeah.
Um, the charities problem is the best start problem, which,
um, you know, as far as I'm concerned.
Yeah. Um, the not-for-profits though, you know,
and there'll be work around the not-for-profits one though.
Um, so that's where membership fees for say RSAs
and the like, might get counted as as income.
Yeah. What and, um, for all sorts
of little neighborhood clubs
and entities, what's happening in that space,
because that's quite worrying for small
Organizations. Yeah. So, so they're
not-for-profits.
Um, and this is anything from, you know, your RSAs to,
to other clubs and societies and things.
Yeah. Um, there, there's two issues there. Yeah.
One is the issue you mentioned there's club fees. Yeah.
Are the club fees, um, income
of the association or not?
Um, we've put out, um, a proposal for consultation
that's out at the moment, um, that basically says
if, if these subscription fee
provides simply core benefits, like the ability
to vote in a, in a, in a,
in a club election or something like that.
Yeah. Then not taxable. Yeah.
If it's providing identifiable benefits that,
that definitely are any person would see as benefits
to the, to the member.
Like, um,
Entry to a swimming pool.
Use of a gym.
Use of a gym. Yep. Um, uh,
Services.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, then what, what, what the,
what the discussion document is saying is
that would be taxable, but it's asking for submissions.
Right. The other leg to that proposal is, um,
they're, they're currently, currently some
of these clubs make, make money with non-members from,
you know, running a bar
or restaurant or something like that.
Conceptually, the income they make from that is, is income.
Um, but currently there's a $1,000 de minimus.
Yep. Basically, so there's a deduction for a thousand,
which makes, it means, what we're suggesting there is is
to try and take a lot of smaller ones out is
to up that to 10,000.
Yeah. So that, that's,
that's what's in the discussion document. Yeah. Yep.
So the DDS on your website? Yeah.
Yeah. It's on my website. Yeah.
Okay. Alright. That was the only thing I had there.
Anyone else wanna chip it on that? Any
Subs off the bed? I've
just got a few more greens stickies to work through.
Done. Not on that one. Sorry. I, I, yeah.
Yeah. Okay. We, we'll, we'll we'll
go to Chloe and then we'll come back to you.
I'll just, we change it up.
Uh, so you soon to be repealed.
Information gathering powers, uh,
how have you used them to date?
Gb? Yeah. Six gb.
Um, we use them for the high wealth individuals projects.
Mm-hmm. And, and what do they actually look like?
Just to spell that out for the committee?
What do the what? Well, I mean, if you were
to listen some of the political rhetoric around it, um,
it sounded like you were bailing up really rich people, uh,
and interrogating them on the spotlight.
What, what it allowed us, I won't put it, what what
what it allowed us to do was to spotlight, do a,
essentially a compulsory survey Yeah.
Of a particular cohort of the cus of our customer group.
In this case it was, I think it was the top, well,
I can't remember off the top of head, but it was about three
or 400 of, of the very wealthiest New Zealanders. Yeah.
Yep. And I guess, what, what did
that survey actually look like?
So there was a report that came out as a result of
that. Mm-hmm. Uh,
I'm familiar with that. Yeah.
When did that report come out?
Uh, I'm just trying to remember. In
2023. Yeah.
So it's not even in the year In review.
Uh, no, but no, we
Got nothing. The
repeal of the powers, dude,
I'm talking about the legislation,
which is repealing the powers within the
period that we're talking about.
No, we're not. This,
this has happened within the past year,
mate. That's just happened.
Hasn't happened. Okay. Let, let's not have us debate.
It's just proceed. Try, try and Okay. Get back on track.
It is,
Yes. It, it's important
that we have data
and evidence driven policy,
and we're talking about legislation,
which repealed the IRDs ability to do
that within the past year.
So if I may return to the questioning, so what did
that survey actually look like?
It, it asked, um, well, it, it,
it required the individuals in question to provide
detailed information about their investments.
Mm-hmm. Um, their income from other sources. Mm-hmm.
Um, so we could, we could then do a analysis of
what their effective tax rate was on
their economic income. Mm-hmm.
And how many ft a did you have working on that?
Uh, very small. It wasn't very big. No.
We had probably a couple of people working on it part-time.
And then we had a, I think we had an external contractor
who was doing some of the data analysis.
Maybe five. Yeah. Okay.
I remember, I recall it being two point fours,
quite small committee of the whole, uh,
but I guess just on that point, um, you know,
when we are talking about obviously creating tax policy
and also you guys advising the government, uh,
did you find access to that information, that evidence,
that data useful in terms of, I guess, the work that you do
For the, in terms of the question that was being asked?
Yes, it was useful to have those powers.
I think it depends on the question that you're asking, uh,
as to whether those powers effectively were
necessary, are necessary or not. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Uh, so I guess that then betrays the question of,
or rather the answer that, uh,
if you're not interested in understanding the effect
of tax rate of the very wealthy people in this country,
then you don't need to collect that data.
Uh, well, you don't need
to collect it in a compulsory fashion.
I mean, I mean, it doesn't stop, it doesn't stop us, um, uh,
doing a survey, for example, a voluntary survey just
as we are doing for investment boost to seek information
to help inform, um, policy decision making.
Mm-hmm. And just what
that section did was confirm our ability to, uh,
demand effectively that information.
Have you ever done a voluntary survey
of high wealth individuals that has
Oh, not, not of that particular group, no.
Okay. Yeah. And, uh, just for our recollection,
when you did it through a compulsory means, I understand
that there was still some who refused.
Yeah, it was, I, I can't remember the exact numbers now,
but yes, that we, we were, we had a response rate
of somewhere like 95 or 97%.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and the, the judgment was that that
actually gave us sufficient information, uh,
that no further action was required.
Yeah. So there was effectively no enforcement
for those who did not Correct.
Comply with ostensibly. Compulsory, yes. Okay. Yeah.
Uh, I guess just finally in rounding out on that,
and I'm sure that you're saying this is something
that you can't accept, um,
but I'm, I guess I'm reading between the lines
and hearing that you're not gonna provide us with, uh,
clarity on whether, not having access
to this information means that, you know,
there are limitations on the quality of the advice
that you can give to ministers when it comes to, uh,
for example, the efficacy or the fairness
or the justice in our tax system.
So, I mean, it, it changes the nature of our ability to,
to, you know, demand information, but,
but we still have an ability to ask for information. Mm.
Yeah. But surely you would believe
that it would curtail your ability
to get access to that information?
'cause you're also saying that you've
never sought it voluntarily.
Well, in a sense, it depends on
what information we're after.
I mean, we, when it comes to investment boost, for example,
I don't think we, we didn't start from a premise
that we would have a, um, you know, a, a dema, a,
a requirement that people filled out a form
to say whether their behavior had changed or not.
The survey was considered the best option.
So we haven't really had to answer that question,
I guess is my question, is my response.
Um, can I ask if any of the work that you had done on
that high wealth individual's report potentially informed
long-term insights briefing that you did on tax?
No. Okay. No. The, yeah, not, not directly. Um, no.
I mean, you can't, you can't remove something from someone's
mind once they've read it, but no, not directly.
Um, I'm keen
to get into the long-term insights briefing. That's probably Okay.
Let's go back to, I've got quick, okay.
So from, so just to be clear, the, um,
information gathering powers Mr.
Brook's referring to, you didn't use those in any
of the period, uh, under review 20 24, 20 25?
Correct. Okay. Thank You.
There were two pieces of legislation. Okay.
Go. We're go to, that's the primary Dr. Deborah Russell
Must let Chloe Todd.
Okay. Chloe briefing an annual review.
I was just making term insights two piece. Okay.
Team getting towards, sorry. Sorry.
Long term insights briefing. Yeah. Great.
Um, so can you summarize for the committee, um, the, uh,
findings of your long-term insights briefing?
Sure. Uh, and these are still draft, right?
Because we put the draft out
and we're currently going through the submissions.
Um, but essentially it, it looked at the future
and said, if you want a tax system that is sufficiently, uh,
resilient to be able to respond to, um, future demands, uh,
potentially increased revenue, then firstly,
a tax system whose core structure is, um, broad based
and stable with flexibility being driven
through changes in rates, provides the best, um,
approach to resilience.
And then looked at the range of
choices you have in thinking about, um,
what levers you could use in the future if you,
if you looked at revenue as being one
of the tools you wanted to use.
And it concludes that there are a broad range
of things you can do.
Everything from expanding, uh, the way in which, uh,
capital gains tax is applied right through to adjustments
to GST rates,
but with a, um, a consequential sort of, uh, mechanism
for ensuring low income people received an offset.
So sort of spanned a lot, it didn't conclude a preference
for any of those options.
That really just sets out what they are.
We're still working through the feedback though, so we'll,
we'll see what that looks
like. Anything you wanted to add to
That? No, no. That's,
that's,
Yeah. Can you,
can you run us through what that process
for public consultation looks like
and when you're intending to publish the final piece,
and if that will result in specific recommendations?
We got, I mean, we didn't,
it wasn't a record number of submissions.
We've got like 25, I think. Yeah. Cool.
Yeah. So the, the,
the process from here is we are working through those.
Yeah. And we'll come to a final version of that. Yeah.
The purpose of the long term site briefing isn't
to provide recommendations, so we won't,
we won't be providing any recommendations.
It's very much a paper designed
to put choices into the public arena so
that people have a better understanding of what the choices
and option sets are.
And what we actually, yesterday, we,
we summarized the submissions and put them on our website,
and so you can get a summary of what people submitted.
Um, and I think all the submissions are also there as well.
The what, sorry? The submission
and the actual submissions are there as well.
The, all 25 of them. Yeah.
Cool. And how, how do you, I guess, work
through those submissions and synthesize 'em?
Because they, it's not, I mean,
you're not making kind of political judgment. Yeah.
I think we're just outlining different
Views within the community.
These, these, these concerns, these themes, these,
It's also a way of making sure if we've missed something
in our thinking, that there's an opportunity in those
submissions for that to be raised.
Mm. But it's more likely to come out
and sort of talk about the on balance sort of sense
that came through the submissions.
Yeah. And unless, as I say,
there's something obvious in our analysis that we've missed.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. But, but
that would also be picked up in that process.
Um, I guess just final question on that.
Uh, does the IRD have a view, I guess, akin
to treasury when it comes to, uh, some things
that are needed in terms of fixing our tax system so
that we get that broad based equitable,
whatever metrics you wanna judge it against?
Here I'm talking about treasury's consistent
advice around CG two.
Yeah. So we haven't, we haven't asked that question since,
uh, the last tax working group
Since 2019. Um,
Yeah, we haven't answered that question.
You haven't been asked in asked.
Correct. Thank You. Thank you.
Okay. We're gonna have a sub by, um, Dan bid. Thank you.
Um, I mean, uh, as part of the long-term insights briefing,
I haven't read the document, but, um, I'm keen, I mean, uh,
uh, an academic debate is around the text GDP ratio
and what's the optimal amount
before you start,
starts having a drag on the economy and so forth.
Is there, have you waded into
that discussion as an organization?
No, we haven't. No.
So our, our focus
and our remit, if you like, is, uh,
that question is from our perspective is answered, uh,
at the political level and then whatever the particular, uh,
tax, uh, revenue that is being sought, our role is to say,
well, what, what would be the best way in which to raise
that would be the, that would be the most efficient from
an economic perspective? Yeah.
And has it been in the past?
I think, um, consumption taxes have been raised
as the more efficient way
To correct, if you That's right.
So coming from a pure efficiency perspective, um,
and that's why, you know, in the context
of the draft report we talk about one option would be
increasing the rate of GST with an offset
for low income households or individuals.
I can't remember the particular definition.
And that's primarily based on the efficiency.
'cause it's a very broad based rate.
It's a very efficient tax to collect his, uh,
least dead weight costs, et cetera. Mm. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Okay.
We're gonna go back to, um, Dr. Russell. Oh yeah.
Just, just to summarize that, well, to chip it on that one.
On, um, I've read the draft long term insights briefing
and I very enjoyable reading.
Thank you. Had a, I haven't had, I haven't had much
of a look at the submissions yet,
but, uh, thank you for all your work on that.
It's really valuable insight. Um, two congratulations.
One is, um, power question 34,
you talk about your payment times, so invoices of
domestic invoices within three business days,
and we're hitting the targets for e business.
So I'm sure all our local
businesses are very grateful for that.
Thank you. So congratulations on that.
And congratulations also on the remedials log, which, um,
I am used myself by reading the other day.
Um, and it's, um, it's quite a battle to get that.
I understand. Is Peter Ley enjoying it,
or not really? No, he,
Yeah, he, he is enjoying it. Yeah.
Nothing that I would say.
Yeah. Um, so, um, uh, going back
to the trust disclosure rules, um, so there's the appeal
of section GB 17, which mm-hmm.
You know, uh,
but the other thing is, um, that's changing is, um,
the trust disclosures.
Um, we, so that's for the bill house,
but you, you are considering what information you are
continue to collect, connect, even in the absence of those
particular rules.
Yes. Um, have you come to any views on that yet,
or as to what you would still continue to collect or,
Um, well, we haven't yet.
Um, it's, we are, I think we ha we are of the view
that we will collect a substantial amount of information
because we're finding it extremely useful for compliance,
for compliance and, um, integrity. Yeah. Um,
That was my view too, that there's too much goes on trust
And there are a lot of trust as well.
So, um, but we, we are still working through Exactly.
We don't want to do it in a way
that imposes unnecessary compliance costs.
So we just, we're just trying to work out, um, yeah.
Which, which data points are
absolutely necessary and which ones aren't.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, we have got some time
because the current legislation will still apply
for this Yeah.
Tax year. Um, so we have got some time
to, to work this through.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Um, I am gonna just have two more things.
Um, uh, your greenhouse gas disclosures.
So, um, your carbon emissions are, are, um,
trending downwards quite nicely.
Um, the government has decided it's going to remove, its all
of government targets around emissions,
but are you going to continue trying
to drive your emissions down?
We, we we're, makes sense for us, um, from a fiscal
and financial perspective, we will continue
to keep a focus on what our emissions look like.
Yeah. Okay. Yep. Thank you.
Um, this one's a little bit of a trickier one.
I'm just kind of, um, and it's, uh, relates
to something from the taxpayers union
who are not normally my friend.
Um, and, um, it was something that
Jordan Williams way raised in, um, uh,
submissions on the tax bill last week.
And I did say to your officials
that I would ask you about it, so I didn't want you to be,
um, jumped by it.
Uh, but, um, Jordan also forwarded some letters
to me yesterday, and so I've got the exact detail now.
Um, uh, he, the, the taxpayers Union was running a campaign,
it wasn't particularly convenient to ir,
and I think, um, commissioner,
you'd said some things about it.
Um, but then, um, he had some information
that the taxpayers union tax files were accessed nine times
between 17 September, 2024, the day
that their inconvenient website was linked, launched,
and the 25th of November, 2024, including
by an external consultant, which seemed odd,
and that Jordan's personal tax files were accessed once.
Um, that does seem not the best, um, do,
have you been able to have a look at
that and work out what's
Going on? Yeah, so, um,
and,
and obviously normally very conscious of tax secrecy here.
Yeah. Um, but given Mr. Williams has, has raised it and,
and it raises some potentially could raise significant
concerns about, about, uh, tax secrecy for people.
So I think it is appropriate for me to respond.
Um, Mr. Williams asked a question of us, which was
how many times and by whom?
Yeah. In terms of from by position was,
were those accounts accessed?
And we provided that information.
Had he, he, he also had the ability to come back
and ask us for the reason Yeah.
That those accounts were accessed.
Um, we are really happy to provide that.
And in fact, given he raised it last week, I'll be writing
to him with that information.
Yeah. As part of his initial request,
because of the, um, you know, the publicity that had been
around the earlier issue, uh, the, the
accesses were referred to our Integrity unit.
So they were all looked at from that perspective, uh,
and we are comfortable that they were all there,
they were done for legitimate reasons, uh,
and that no one inappropriately accessed.
And one of the things I'll say is we, we take accessing
and, uh, accessing people's tax information
incredibly seriously.
And we have, uh, an ongoing regime of both monitoring,
uh, technically monitoring what people are accessing.
And we get referrals both from internally
and externally with suggestions
that people may not have done.
So all of those are considered by the Integrity Unit.
Uh, I think over the last five years, we had about 350
allegations of an appropriate access.
Of those 107 were formally investigated,
and the outcomes of that were 72 dismissals, 25 warnings,
and for 10 they were deemed it was,
it was not an appropriate.
So we take all of that really seriously. Um,
So when you say 72 dismissals,
72 staff members were dismissed?
Correct.
So, so the reason I'm saying that is we take the fact
that, um, our staff have privileged access
to tax information very seriously.
We train them, coach them,
and remind them of the importance of,
of only accessing accounts
where they have a legitimate business purpose.
And so the reason I'm raising that is to, is to signal
that we do take it very seriously.
Yep. Uh, I will write to Mr. Williams, uh, just to give him
that information, which we would've
provided had he had, he asked no, no question.
If he's unhappy with the response, he's free to respond
to the, to go to the Ombudsman,
or that's probably the best mechanism.
Um, but as I say, the Integrity Unit took the extra step
of having a look at those accesses
and concluded that there was no further action required.
Thank you for setting all that there.
I think that's really helpful. Um, am I right in thinking
of course, this is quite a long time back,
there was a couple of people who, back in the two thousands
IR staffers who, um, said that yes,
IR had given them the information that they weren't
to access people's tax files appropriately if they said they
hadn't read the information, therefore they went And
so you've now take, obviously there's much more active steps
within IR to make sure.
Yeah. So, so there's both, there's both, you know, we,
we have tech, the technical ability
to limit access for some people.
Yeah. Um, uh, you know, but,
but many of our staff can access multiple, you know Yeah.
Accounts, and those are both actively monitored.
Uh, and as I say, we will respond to suggestions
that someone has inappropriately gone in,
and that's all dealt with by an independent group, uh,
who will, who have the ability to go
and look at the purpose for which it was accessed.
If there is an issue that then gets raised a formal
investigation set up, which has three different parties from
within the organization involved,
but the Integrity Unit retains the ownership and oversight,
and they have, if necessary, a direct line to me.
And if I'm the one under investigation, a direct line
to the Public Service commissioner, uh, to ensure
that there's, that, that independence
and that an objectivity is applied
to those transgressions. Okay.
Well, thank you, um, uh, Dr. Russell for raising that
on behalf of, um, Jordan Williams.
And we as a committee will leave that for you, fully respond
as an individual complaint in an operational matter.
So, um, thank you. Thank
you, uh, commissioner for getting that.
I want that process on the record
because I, I was pretty confident about IR having some
pretty good processes in place.
Yeah, for sure. Okay. No, thank you in advance. Yeah. Okay.
Anything else? And, um, last one from me, I'm not sure.
Um, uh, we, oh, I, I think you, you possibly noticed
that we've changed our questions this year.
Yes. Everyone's much happier. Much better. Oh, good.
It's much Better. Um, but the last, not as many. Yeah.
Not so much talk about COVID. Yeah. Yeah.
But, um, but also the last one, uh, oh, question 39, 3 areas
of concern for your organization.
Um, and you, uh, we've already sort of done tax debt
to death in this session.
We've had a really good crack at it.
Um, and, uh,
I think we've already talked along a little bit about
responding to the economic environment.
So, um, I think we've covered that,
but the other area of concern you raised is maintaining
social license and trust.
Just reminder, just give us a rundown on that. Sure.
'cause um, uh, uh, obviously used to be, you know,
if you say you work for IRD, that's kind of social death
and traditionally don't really like the tax department
and they fear engaging with it and all sorts of things.
Yeah. It's great work stories. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, so the first thing I'd say is that,
as you'll see on, in the annual report on page 11, um,
customers have reflected actually an improved rate
of trust in us, which I think is really positive.
Yeah. I guess the reason this is, um, one of, you know,
one a a challenge is it's something you always
need to keep a focus on.
It's very, uh, hard to gain and easy to lose.
There are a number of aspects we focus on here.
The first in a sense is customer service.
And one of the things I've, I've mentioned a couple
of times, some of the international directions we've been
having, and one of the things we observed, the last set
of conversations we had was that international jurisdictions
that have switched from, let's say, taking, um,
treating people as taxpayers as opposed to treating them
as a customer with a service, their observation is that
that has helped improved voluntary compliance.
It's helped break down potential barriers and,
and perceptions and misperceptions of, um, uh,
of, you know, what the loan revenue's there to do.
The second is, um,
and we've just been talking about the importance we place on
tax secrecy, on, on information and so on.
And so the way in which we respond
to concerns is very important to us.
That's why we responded the way we did to the questions
of hashing, which we brought up
with the taxpayers union last year, uh,
is the reason we have those integrity measures in place.
And so we've, you know, it's important to us
that we remain transparent about what we are doing.
Which brings me to the third element, which is,
as we progress things, for example, such as the rollout
of ai, it's important that we are transparent about that,
that we can give people confidence
that we're doing it in a way that we thought very hard
and consciously about the extent to which, um, uh, it,
it retains the, the confidentiality of information.
Uh, and then finally I'd say, you know, we engage a lot now
with business partners in the ecosystem,
whether they're software providers
or the, um, accounting, uh, you know,
institutions and so on.
And I think, again, um, uh, being as open
and transparent, as engaged as we can be
with those parties is an important way of us to ensure that,
um, uh, our customers can see that, you know,
we are trying to do the right thing.
Uh, one of the things that we, we particularly, uh,
have been pushing in many
of those organizations have been encouraging is, you know,
if you are a, a tax agent
and you have someone who's in debt, as I mentioned
before, contact us.
And I think once people contact us, um, we aren't usually
as scary as they had in their heads.
And I receive a lot
of correspondence from people who've come off a phone call,
for example, and said, I was really dreading it, uh,
and yet I've walked away feeling really good.
You took the time to understand my problem
and you've helped me resolve it.
So, um, and resolving it doesn't always mean, uh, you know,
in their favor in that sense,
but they've really appreciated the
way in which we've gone about it.
So I think the more we can do that, um, the more we are able
to retain that social license
in the confidence of the public
And maybe just connected to that.
I mean, I think the other observation we've had is that, uh,
customers have access to a lot
of different information sources
and us having confess that they are using
and can trust the right information's becoming quite a
challenge for us to get across.
Yeah. So people have lots of different tools that interact
with different information sets.
There's a lot of AI tools that scrape our website,
but sometimes use old information.
Um, so it's, it's quite a quest for us, I think,
to make sure that as our customers access different
information sources that we have, you know, validated,
trusted information that we can some of those, um,
players in the market, but equally just acknowledge there'll
be players in the market that we cannot
control and influence.
And we've gotta do quite a lot of work, I think,
to make sure our customers are well educated about
where can they get trusted information from,
because there's a lot of confusing information.
Yep. Okay. Okay.
Members, um, well we're down to the final section of, uh,
general questions and concluding observations and,
and commissioner that that points to you as well,
if you wanna make some concluding remarks,
although you last pretty much finished this up, but yeah.
Members, Mr. Mercy,
Uh, look, I'll just say, uh, thank you for what was,
I think a very engaging conversation.
Uh, you, you know,
as you know from a public sector officials perspective,
three hours against, uh, when you coming out, uh, in front
of FC can always appear a bit daunting.
But, um, thank you.
It's been a very constructive conversation. Well,
You ne you never look ded.
So thank you commissioner
and thank you to the deputy commissioners
and the leadership team as well for the time
you put in this in preparation and day.
So thank you. Thank you. Thank you Members.
We've got a post-hearing questions are due on, uh,
noon on Monday for anyone who wants to submit those.
Otherwise, we will see you back at FC. Fantastic. Thank.